Ansible Basic Questions with Answers

1. What is Ansible and why is it used in DevOps?
👉 Ansible is an open-source IT automation tool used for configuration management, application deployment, and orchestration. It is agentless (uses SSH/WinRM), simple to use, and helps maintain consistency across servers.

2. What are the advantages of Ansible over other configuration management tools?
👉 Advantages:

Agentless (no software needed on managed nodes)

Simple YAML-based playbooks (easy to read/write)

Idempotent (ensures same result regardless of repeated execution)

Scalable & lightweight compared to Puppet/Chef

3. Explain the difference between Ansible ad-hoc commands and playbooks.
👉 Ad-hoc commands are one-time tasks (e.g., restart a service).
👉 Playbooks are YAML files used for repeatable, structured automation with multiple tasks.

Example:

ansible all -m ping      # Ad-hoc
ansible-playbook site.yml # Playbook


4. What is an inventory file in Ansible? What are its types?
👉 Inventory file lists the target hosts.

Static Inventory → hosts defined in a file (/etc/ansible/hosts)

Dynamic Inventory → fetched dynamically (e.g., AWS, GCP, Azure plugins)

5. What are modules in Ansible? Give examples.
👉 Modules are small programs used to perform tasks.
Examples:

copy → copy files

yum/apt → install packages

service → manage services

user → manage users

6. What is the use of ansible.cfg file?
👉 It defines Ansible configuration such as:

Inventory file path

SSH connection settings

Timeout values

Privilege escalation

7. Difference between command and shell module?
👉 command → executes command without shell features (no pipes, no redirection).
👉 shell → executes inside shell (supports pipes, variables, redirection).

Example:

- name: Using command
  command: cat /etc/passwd
  
- name: Using shell
  shell: cat /etc/passwd | grep root


8. What is an idempotent task in Ansible?
👉 A task is idempotent if running it multiple times produces the same result without making unnecessary changes.
Example: Installing a package → if already installed, no changes.

9. How do you run a playbook against a single host?
👉 By specifying host in inventory or using -l flag.

ansible-playbook site.yml -l webserver1


10. What is the default port used by Ansible to connect to remote hosts?
👉 Port 22 (SSH) for Linux, Port 5985/5986 (WinRM) for Windows.

Ansible Intermediate Questions with Answers

1. How does Ansible achieve agentless communication with managed nodes?
👉 Ansible uses SSH for Linux/Unix and WinRM for Windows to connect to managed nodes. No agent installation is required.

2. Explain handlers in Ansible and when you use them.
👉 Handlers are tasks triggered only when notified by another task.
Example: Restart service only if config file changes.

tasks:
  - name: Copy config file
    copy: src=app.conf dest=/etc/app.conf
    notify: Restart app

handlers:
  - name: Restart app
    service: name=app state=restarted


3. What are facts in Ansible? How can you use them?
👉 Facts are system properties collected automatically (OS, IP, CPU, memory).
They are accessed using ansible_facts.
Example:

debug: var=ansible_facts['default_ipv4']['address']


4. How do you encrypt sensitive data in Ansible?
👉 Use Ansible Vault.

ansible-vault create secrets.yml
ansible-vault encrypt file.yml
ansible-playbook site.yml --ask-vault-pass


5. Difference between roles and playbooks in Ansible?
👉 Playbooks = define automation tasks in YAML.
👉 Roles = structured way to organize playbooks into reusable units (tasks, handlers, variables, templates, etc.).

6. How do you use variables in Ansible? What is variable precedence?
👉 Variables can be defined in inventory, playbooks, vars_files, or passed via CLI.
👉 Precedence → CLI vars > Playbook vars > Role vars > Inventory vars > Default vars.

7. How does Ansible Galaxy help in playbook development?
👉 Ansible Galaxy is a community hub to share/download pre-built roles.
Example:

ansible-galaxy install geerlingguy.mysql


8. How do you use tags in Ansible? Why are they useful?
👉 Tags allow selective execution of tasks.
Example:

- name: Install Apache
  yum: name=httpd state=present
  tags: apache


Run only apache tasks:

ansible-playbook site.yml --tags apache


9. What is the purpose of ansible-vault and how do you use it?
👉 Used to encrypt secrets (passwords, API keys).
Example:

ansible-vault encrypt secrets.yml
ansible-playbook play.yml --ask-vault-pass


