Test ID: 2023OPSP02
Innoventes Technologies India Pvt. Ltd
Sujata.d guys recently attend devops interview questions 

DevOps Test
Section 1: Programming Test
Download the logfile. Write scripts/programs in any scripting/programming language to do the
following:
- Scan the log file for POST requests and create a summary in CSV format that lists each
unique IP address and the number of POST requests corresponding to that IP address.
- The example of the CSV is as below:
164.242.88.10, 23
abc.com, 4
. .

Section 2: Docker question
Clone the Java application from Github. Write a Dockerfile to containeraise the application. You
can submit the docker file alone.

Section 3: Linux
● What command would you use to find how many disks are mounted on a linux system
● What command would you use to find the free/available & used RAM in a linux system?
● What command would you use to search for a file called ‘important.txt’ that is present
somewhere on the filesystem?
● What shell environment variables have you used in your day to day work?
● How would you know if a linux system is running out of RAM and whether it is using swap
space?
● While booting a linux system, it gets stuck. The error message indicates that the boot
sequence is stuck while trying to mount a non-existent disk. What would you do to
recover from this situation?
● What command would you use to find all lines containing any of the words “hello”,
“world”, “foo” and “bar”, in all text files in a given directory? Note that a single command
should look for all those 4 words.

Section 4: AWS (Optional)
● Have you used AWS CLI for accessing services such as IAM / EC2 / VPC / EBS / S3 /
RDS ?
● Can you look at the AWS CLI documentation and write the command for printing all tags
of an S3 bucket?
● Can you look at the AWS CLI documentation and write the command for printing all
volumes of type “gp3” that are attached to a given EC2 instance? This can be a
single command or a linux command pipeline.
● Have you used Python Boto3 SDK / APIs accessing services such as IAM / EC2 / VPC /
EBS / S3 / RDS?
● Can you write a Python Boto3 SDK based script to add the tag “Department” with value
“Engineering”, to all EC2 instances in a given VPC ?
● Can you write a Python Boto3 SDK based script to remove all ingress rules which allow
traffic from “0.0.0.0/0”, from all security groups in a given VPC?
● Give the terraform configuration for creating a single EC2 instance on AWS.
Test ID: 2023OPSP02
Innoventes Technologies India Pvt. Ltd

How to submit
● Scripting & programming questions in Section 1 should be submitted as runnable
script/programs with proper extensions. Add a readme file describing the
programming/scripting language used and the steps to run the script.
● Answers to Section 2 should be submitted as a Dockerfile
● Answers to Section 3 & 4 can be submitted as a regular text file.
● zip all the files together and send to jobs@innoventes.co or share through Google
drive

Evaluation criteria:
● Answers provided to the questions
● Code Quality in programming questions
