Q1. What is Git?
Answer: Git is a distributed version control system (DVCS) that helps
track code changes, collaborate with teams, roll back to older
versions, and manage branching/merging.
💡 Pro Tip: Always mention "distributed" — it highlights Git’s oline
capability.

Q2. What is GitHub?
Answer: GitHub is a cloud platform to host Git repositories and
collaborate using Pull Requests, Issues, Actions (CI/CD), and project
boards.
💡 Pro Tip: Say Git = tool, GitHub = platform.

Q3. Common Git commands?
Answer:
git init → Initialize a new Git repository
git clone <url> → Copy repository from remote to local
git status → Show modified/untracked files
git add . → Stage all changes
git commit -m "msg" → Save a snapshot with a message
git log --oneline → Show commit history in short form
git branch → List branches
git checkout -b <branch> → Create + switch to a new branch
git merge <branch> → Merge branch into current
git push origin main → Push local commits to GitHub
git pull → Fetch + merge changes from remote
git fetch → Only download changes (no merge)
💡 Pro Tip: In interviews, mention git commit -am "msg" as a shortcut
for tracked files.

Q4. Dierence between Git and GitHub?
Answer:
Git → Local VCS tool that manages versions of code.
GitHub → Cloud hosting service that extends Git with collaboration
features.
Interview Edge: Mention alternatives like GitLab, Bitbucket.

Q5. What is a repository?
Answer: A repository is a project directory managed by Git,
containing code, commit history, and branches.
Local repository → Exists on your machine (git init).
Remote repository → Hosted on GitHub for team collaboration.
💡 Pro Tip: Interviewers like when you highlight the dierence
between local and remote repos.

Q6. What is a commit?
Answer: A commit is a snapshot of code at a point in time, identified
by a unique SHA hash, author, timestamp, and commit message.
💡 Pro Tip: A clear commit message helps track why a change was
made.

📌 Section 2: Branching & Merging

Q7. What is a branch?
Answer: A branch is a parallel line of development. It allows
developers to build features without aecting the main branch.
💡 Pro Tip: Mention how feature branches prevent breaking
production code.

Q8. What is a merge conflict? How do you resolve it?
Answer: A merge conflict happens when two branches modify the
same code section. Git cannot decide which change to keep.
Steps:
Open file and check conflict markers.
Decide correct changes (or combine).

3. Save → git add → git commit.
💡 Pro Tip: Mention that handling conflicts quickly is vital in team
projects.

Q9. Dierence between git merge and git rebase?
Answer:
Merge → Combines histories, keeps non-linear commits.
Rebase → Replays commits on another branch, making history
linear.
💡 Pro Tip: Teams often use merge for collaboration, and rebase
for personal branches.

Q10. What is a fast-forward merge?
Answer: A fast-forward merge occurs when no new commits exist on
the target branch, so Git simply moves the branch pointer ahead
without creating a merge commit.
💡 Pro Tip: Fast-forward keeps history simple, but doesn’t show that a
branch existed.

Q11. What is a detached HEAD?
Answer: Detached HEAD occurs when Git points directly to a commit
instead of a branch.
Commits made here won’t belong to any branch unless you create
one.
💡 Pro Tip: Used for experiments or reviewing older commits.

📌 Section 3: Commands
Q11. Common Git commands?
Answer:
git init → Initialize a new Git repository
git clone <url> → Copy repository from remote to local
git status → Show modified/untracked files
git add . → Stage all changes
git commit -m "msg" → Save a snapshot with a message
git log --oneline → Show commit history in short form
git branch → List branches
git checkout -b <branch> → Create + switch to a new branch
git merge <branch> → Merge branch into current
git push origin main → Push local commits to GitHub
git pull → Fetch + merge changes from remote
git fetch → Only download changes (no merge)
💡 Pro Tip: In interviews, mention git commit -am "msg" as a shortcut
for tracked files.

Q12. What is the dierence between git pull and git fetch?
Answer:
git fetch downloads commits from remote into remote-tracking
branches (like origin/main) but doesn’t merge them.
git pull does fetch + merge, updating your current branch
automatically.




